Today being teacher's day,let us pay a small tribute to Mr.V.R.Venkatesan,who was undoubtedly one of the best teachers for marine engineers.
He was considered a guru of control engineering amongst marine engineers.
It may be impossible for most of us to understand this topic the way he had understood.
I might have never ever dared to make a video on this topic,but as an afterthought I felt the best tribute I can pay to V.R.V.is to make a small video on a topic he had really loved and mastered.
I had always found this topic very challenging and still have lots of gaps in my understanding.
The clarity of thought V.R.V.had will always be elusive to most of us.
I strongly hope that I will be able to do some justice to this topic and generate enough interest to direct you to his elaborate video on this topic in HMT YouTube channel.
The link for his full length video will be available in the description.
With a small request to the departed soul to guide us further on the pursuit to understand marine engineering,let us move on to the video.
In this video we will try and understand the basics of three types of control action proportional,integral and derivative.
Most of the materials available in the internet or in the books look at it in a very mathematical way like this.
This is proportional to KPE in some brackets,some T,which is terrifying to most of us marine engineers except for a gifted few.
If somebody wants elaboration on mathematics,please do request in comment section we can handle it separately.
But let us now try to understand it in a very rudimentary way without any mathematics by taking the example of maintaining the level of water in the tank.
We want the water level to be maintained here,we call this at the set point.
Presently it is in a steady state balanced with water flowing in,supply water flowing in at 200 liters per minute and water being consumed from the tank at 200 liters per minute.
I have a supply wall here,which is presently 50% open,I can keep it 100% open or 100% shut.
And this wall can be controlled incrementally or say proportionately between this full open and full shut position.
Now the water level in the tank is supposed to be maintained here and if by chance the water level falls here,what I have is a error.
We call it as a deviation or offset or error.
We also sometimes use the jargon's desired value of the control variable.
So these are all just jargon's but let us keep it simple,we want the water level to be here.
Now as I already told you 200 liters of water per minute is consumed from the tank and same 200 liters per minute of water is filling the tank.
So the level obviously is going to maintain here.
Now suddenly the consumer is now started consuming more.
So he starts consuming 300 liters of water from the tank per minute.
So it is obvious that the level of water in the tank will reduce.
Now it is obvious that if I want the level of water to be here,I need to open this wall.
Now the question we are going to ask here is,how much will this wall open,supply wall?
Now suppose I make a relationship between this error or the deviation and the opening of the wall in such a way that I establish a proportional relationship between the error and the opening of the wall.
I call this as proportional action.
The opening of the wall depends on how much is the error.
That is the proportionality I am talking about.
This opening of the wall I call it as corrective action.
Now when I have a proportionality established,you can observe that it will happen only after the error has happened.
That means this wall will commence opening or commence correcting only after the error has happened.
The supply wall opens more and more as the deviation becomes more and more.
As the supply wall opens more and more,there will come a point where the supply is equal to 300 liters per minute.
The same as the consumption.
Now since the supply is equal to consumption,we call this as the steady state condition.
Now the level will remain steady here and it will not go down any further.
But what we have here left is the error or offset or deviation.
Now suppose I had linked the proportional action in such a way that when the error is so much,the valve will be full open.
And when the level is very high here,the valve will be full shut.
We know that the water level has to be between these two points.
It is not possible for the water level to cross these two limiting points.
It has to be somewhere in between these two points.
Now you can see that this is quite a change in level possibility.
If I don't want the water level to fluctuate so much between these two points and it should be fluctuating only between these two points.
What do I need to do?
I need to ensure that when the level is here,my valve is full open.
And when the level is here,the valve is full shut.
So what have I done here?
I have ensured that for a small change in the deviation,I am creating a bigger change in the opening of the valve or shutting of the valve.
So this adjustment is in simple terms called the proportional band.
The narrower the proportional band,I can reduce the maximum deviation.
Now this is what people roughly refer to as proportional band.
It is in fact,it in fact tells you about the sensitivity of the corrective action with respect to the error.
This proportional band is also sometimes mathematically they define it as it is the opposite of gain.
But we will not speak about it unnecessarily here to keep things simple.
So going back to the level of water in the tank.
So we know that the valve was opening faster when the error happened and the error got stabilized here.
Now if I don't want the error to be there at all,we have another trick in our cupboard.
And that is called the integral action.
Now what is integral action?
It may be a little bit jargonish,but we say that rate of corrective action is proportional to the deviation.
In other terms,what does it mean?
If I have integral action,the integral action,see here let us take it step by step.
Because of the proportional action,the valve started opening and here I got a steady state.
But I got a error offset.
Now I want to eliminate the offset.
How can I eliminate the offset?
By making sure that the valve is opening more.
This is exactly what the integral action is going to do.
Now we have defined it mathematically as rate of corrective action is proportional to the deviation.
Now when we say rate,obviously it means that the valve is opening.
If the valve is not moving,then obviously there is no rate of opening.
Okay.
That we can also say that the valve will stop opening more when the deviation is not there.
So what do we conclude?
We conclude that the integral action actually removes the deviation.
So the valve will continue to open because the error is there.
And if the valve continues to open more than what was required,that 300 liters per minute,
the level will start rising up and it will remove the deviation.
You see,this is the job of the integral action.
Let us now look at the third option,which is called the derivative action.
Now let us see how does it define.
Mathematically it says that corrective action is proportional to the rate of deviation.
Here it means that the valve opening is going to see how fast the deviation is happening.
See rate of deviation.
That means how fast the deviation is happening.
So it is predictive in nature.
On the basis of this prediction,this valve will continue to open more than what the P action
would have done.
It is anticipating a big drop in level.
The outcome of this derivative action is that the stability point with or without offset
is achieved quickly.
So we can also think it like this.
You see here,let us go back to this particular example.
Now I am going back to 200 liters.
And somebody has opened 300 liters.
The control system is seeing that,oh,the level has started falling.
The control system measuring that is looking at the rate of fall of the level.
And it is now going to predict,oh,at this rate the level is falling so fast.
That means I need to open much more.
So the deviation is actually triggering the proportional action and already opening the
valve.
And the differential action is predicting that at how fast the level is falling.
So I will open that much more.
So what will happen?
The stability will be arrived much earlier here.
The level will settle here rather than here if derivative action was not there.
Right?
The level will settle here because it was predictive in nature.
And the integral action will put it back to the set point because it will remove the
offset.
Let us summarize the whole thing.
Depending on the error and the relationship between the error and the opening of this
valve,there are three types of action.
One is the one which is proportional action.
So the valve is going to be operated by the P proportional action which is going to depend
on the error.
Then to remove the offset,I have the integral action.
The whole idea of this integral action is to remove the offset.
And to make sure that the stability point is reached earlier,the level doesn't fluctuate
too much,I have the derivative action also.
So then when I have a PID controller,this valve is,opening of the valve is the resultant
of all these three actions put together.
So that is how the controls are happening in a PID controller.
The processing of these controls can be pneumatic,electronic,digital.
And generally they can be used for anything like controlling the level,controlling the
pressure,controlling the temperature,controlling the speed.
So the topic is much more than what we are described here.
I recommend you to please go to the link provided in the description section to see our dear VR
Venkateson's full video on this topic which will be very elaborate with great examples.
I also request you to please see his beautiful videos on Governor Drup,reverse power and other
complicated conceptual topics.
They are all available on HMT YouTube site.
Mr.Venkateson is not there with us.
His knowledge and dedication had in fact inspired me.
I am sure his fantastic videos will continue to guide generations of marine engineers in future also.
May his soul rest in peace.
Om Shanti.